================================================================================
==                               HOL ZERO                                     ==
==                                                                            ==
== by Mark Adams                                                              ==
== Copyright (c) Proof Technologies Ltd, 2009-2016                            ==
================================================================================

This is the HOL Zero theorem prover.  See VERSION file for the version number.

Subsequent sections in this README deal with:

    1. Directory Contents
    2. Overview of HOL Zero
    3. System Requirements and Installation
    4. Starting HOL Zero
    5. Author and Acknowledgements
    6. Copyright, Licence and Disclaimer
    7. Website, Bounty and Contact Details

        *         *         *         *         *         *         *

                           1. DIRECTORY CONTENTS

The HOL Zero home directory consists of the following files:

  CHANGES     List of changes between versions.
  INSTALL     Instructions on how to install HOL Zero and supporting software.
  LICENSE     Disclaimer and terms of the open source licence.
  README      This file.
  VERSION     File containing the version number of this HOL Zero release.

  configure   Executable for configuring the installation.
  Makefile    File used by 'make' to direct the installation.

the following temporary file:

  Makefile.config
              Installation configuration file resulting from 'configure'.

the following directories:

  doc         Documentation.  Includes user manual and glossary.
  etc         Supporting files used in the installation.
  src         Source code.

and, by default, the following temporary directory:

  bin         Executables.  Default location created on installation.

        *         *         *         *         *         *         *

                          2. OVERVIEW OF HOL ZERO

HOL Zero is a HOL theorem prover, i.e. a program for performing mechanised
formal proof according to the formal logic Higher Order Logic (HOL).  HOL is a
classical, higher-order logic with a simple polymorphic type system.  There are
various HOL theorem provers, and HOL Zero is the simplest.

HOL Zero's primary intended role is:

 - A trusted platform for replaying formal proofs performed on other systems,
  for the purposes of checking and/or consolidating proofs.  Note that, for this
  role, some mechanism for exporting proof objects from other systems and for
  importing them into HOL Zero is required (but not included).  One such
  mechanism is currently under development at Proof Technologies.

HOL Zero also has various other, overlapping roles:

 - A simple tool for mechanised formal proof, for teaching formal logic;
 - A pedagogical example of a simple LCF-style theorem prover implementation,
  for teaching computer science;
 - A clear example of the Common HOL API (an API for basic HOL functionality);
 - A basis for experimentation in theorem prover design;
 - A driving force for improvements in basic aspects of other HOL systems.

With these roles in mind, it has been carefully designed and implemented from
scratch, with priorities in trustworthiness, basic, reliable functionality and
simple, well-commented source code.  The source code aims to be understandable
to people unfamiliar with theorem prover implementation.  Source code comments
give clear explanation of context, and included in the documentation directory
is an extensive glossary of technical terminology.

HOL Zero is a basic system, much smaller than the other HOL systems.  Its
theory covers just lambda calculus, predicate logic, ordered pairs and natural
numbers.  Interactive proof is done by joining basic forward proof steps via a
simple command line interface.  It lacks the interactive and automated resaoning
facilities considered as almost essential in other systems.  However, like the
other HOL systems, it has an LCF-style architecture.  This means it can be
extended indefinitely by the user, to include the extensive theory and reasoning
facilities of other systems and beyond.  Furthermore, this architecture
guarantees that these extensions cannot compromise system soundness.  Most of
mathematics can be built upon this basic, robust system.

        *         *         *         *         *         *         *

                  3. SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS AND INSTALLATION

HOL Zero can run on any Unix-like operating system (e.g. Mac OS X, Cygwin,
Linux, Solaris, BSD, Minix) that runs the Bash shell.  It requires the programs
OCaml and Camlp5 to be installed.  OCaml and Camlp5 are available from the
following webpages respectively:

        http://ocaml.org/releases/

        http://camlp5.gforge.inria.fr/

HOL Zero itself is installed by a classic Make-style process, but where the
distribution directory doubles as the HOL Zero home directory, and so should not
be moved or deleted after installation.  Detailed instructions are provided in
INSTALL, but for a simple installation, with executables placed in the 'bin'
subdirectory of the HOL Zero home directory, enter the following in a Unix
terminal window (and add the 'bin' subdirectory to your user execution path):

      > ./configure         (the ">" indicates the terminal window prompt)
      > make
      > make install
      > make clean

This is sufficient to get HOL Zero running.  However, for anything more than
trivial interaction, a GUI that supports classic text editing and interactive
session feedback in separate subwindows is almost essential.  The Emacs editor
is well-equipped for this task, but for those uncomfortable with its
idiosyncratic editing conventions, we recommend the editor that comes bundled
with the ProofPower theorem prover, called Xpp.  Note that Xpp requires Motif to
be installed.  ProofPower can be downloaded from:

        http://www.lemma-one.com/

For more detailed installation instructions for all the above programs,
including background appendices for Unix novices, see INSTALL.

        *         *         *         *         *         *         *

                           4. STARTING HOL ZERO

Once installed, HOL Zero is started by running the executable 'holzero'.  We
give two alternatives for doing this from a Unix terminal window:

 1. The simplest way is to run HOL Zero in the terminal window itself.
   However, note that in-line editing facilities will be poor unless you have
   RLWrap installed (see INSTALL file).  Directly execute the 'holzero'
   command from the terminal window:

      > holzero           (the ">" indicates the terminal window prompt)

 2. A better alternative for substantial interaction is to start an editor
   window that maintains separate subwindows for the user ML input script and
   the ML session feedback.  A good simple editor for this is Xpp (see INSTALL
   file), which is started by:

      > xpp -c holzero

   In Xpp, the upper window is for editing text and the lower window is for
   session feedback.  To enter text into the session, select the text and
   press Ctrl-Enter.  Text can also be entered line-by-line by pressing
   Ctrl-N at each line.

The first few seconds of starting HOL Zero involve building the system from
scratch.  A few hundred lines of output whizz past the screen, and then the HOL
Zero banner is printed, indicating a successful build.  HOL Zero is then ready
for user interaction.  Refer to Section 1.3 of the user manual (in the
documentation directory) for a brief introduction to using HOL Zero.

        *         *         *         *         *         *         *

                      5. AUTHOR AND ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

HOL Zero is written by Mark Adams, Proof Technologies Ltd.  Many aspects of its
design draw on the work of others who have worked in the field, most notably
Robin Milner, Mike Gordon, Larry Paulson, Tom Melham, Roger Jones, Konrad Slind
and John Harrison.  HOL Zero is inspired, in particular, by the beauty and
simplicity of Harrison's HOL Light system.

We would like to acknowledge the following individuals, whose comments and
suggestions have helped make HOL Zero a better system:

  Rob Arthan            Phil Clayton        Mike Gordon        Tom Hales
  John Harrison         Peter Homier        Roger Jones        Cezary Kaliszyk
  Daniel Moniz          Michael Norrish     Randy Pollack      Cris Perdue
  Daniel de Rauglaudre  Sebastian Reichelt  Matt Wampler-Doty  Makarius Wenzel
  Roland Zumkeller

HOL Zero is dedicated to Robin Milner, inventor of the "LCF style" of theorem
prover design and the ML programming language, who sadly passed away in 2010,
and to Mike Gordon, who created the HOL logic and the first HOL system.

        *         *         *         *         *         *         *

                    6. COPYRIGHT, LICENCE AND DISCLAIMER

All files in this distribution are copyright Proof Technologies Ltd, 2008-2016.

All files are distributed under the terms of the GNU General Public License
(version 3): they are free and open source and come with no warranty.  See the
LICENSE file for details.

        *         *         *         *         *         *         *

                   7. WEBSITE, BOUNTY AND CONTACT DETAILS

The Proof Technologies website has pages dedicated to HOL Zero, including the
download for the latest version, at:

        http://www.proof-technologies.com/holzero/

Users are encouraged to contact Proof Technologies with any problems found in
the HOL Zero system, or with any suggestions for improvements.  There is a $100
bounty for any soundness-related problems found (see the 'Bounty.txt' file in
the documentation directory).

You can contact us via the website HOL Zero pages.  Alternatively, you can
e-mail us:

        holzero@proof-technologies.com

To receive occasional news about HOL Zero, e-mail the following address, with
"subscribe" in the subject field:

        holnews@proof-technologies.com
