================================================================================
==                          HOL ZERO ETC DIRECTORY                            ==
==                                                                            ==
== by Mark Adams                                                              ==
== Copyright (c) Proof Technologies Ltd, 2012-2016                            ==
================================================================================

This is the HOL Zero 'etc' directory, for supporting files used in the HOL Zero
installation (specifically, by 'Makefile' in the HOL Zero home directory).  This
directory contains parts used to create the 'holzero' and 'hzhelp' scripts, and
inputs to Camlp5 used to adjust the OCaml lexical syntax (see Section 2 below).
It is also used to hold any temporary files created in the installation process.

        *         *         *         *         *         *         *

                           1. DIRECTORY CONTENTS

PERMANENT CONTENTS

  README            This file.

  holzero.header    Header for 'holzero' script.
  holzero.main      Main body for 'holzero' script.
  hzhelp.header     Header for 'hzhelp' script.
  hzhelp.main       Main body for 'hzhelp' script.
  pa_o_hz.5.ml      HOL Zero adaption of 'pa_o.ml' for Camlp5 version 5.x.
  pa_o_hz.6.ml      HOL Zero adaption of 'pa_o.ml' for Camlp5 version 6.x.
  plexer_hz.5.ml    HOL Zero adaption of 'plexer.ml' for Camlp5 version 5.x.
  plexer_hz.6.ml    HOL Zero adaption of 'plexer.ml' for Camlp5 version 6.x.

TEMPORARY CONTENTS

  holzero           Script ready to be copied to executables directory.
  hzhelp            Script ready to be copied to executables directory.
  hzocaml           Executable ready to be copied to executables directory.
  pa_o_hz.cmi       Intermediate file generated from 'pa_o_hz.ml'.
  pa_o_hz.cmo       Intermediate file generated from 'pa_o_hz.ml'.
  pa_o_hz.log       Output from 'ocamlc' when generating 'pa_o_hz.cmo'.
  pa_o_hz.ml        Intermediate copy of 'pa_o_hz.x.ml' for Camlp5 version.
  plexer_hz.cmi     Intermediate file generated from 'plexer_hz.ml'.
  plexer_hz.cmo     Intermediate file generated from 'plexer_hz.ml'.
  plexer_hz.log     Output from 'ocamlc' when generating 'plexer_hz.cmo'.
  plexer_hz.ml      Intermediate copy of 'plexer_hz.x.ml' for Camlp5 version.

        *         *         *         *         *         *         *

                   2. ADJUSTING THE OCAML LEXICAL SYNTAX

HOL Zero uses the backquote character (`) as the start and end delimiter for HOL
type and term quotations.  These HOL quotations are single lexical OCaml tokens
that get passed on as a string to HOL Zero for parsing.  To achieve this, it is
necessary to adjust the OCaml lexical syntax to recognise backquoted quotations
as single lexical tokens.  This is done by 'Makefile' during HOL Zero
installation, in a three-stage process that uses programs that come bundled with
OCaml and Camlp5 acting on adaptions for HOL Zero of the Camlp5 source code
files for an OCaml lexer and syntax analyser.  We explain the Makefile stages
here in terms of how they would be done manually.

In the first stage, we choose appropriate versions of the adapted lexer and
syntax analyser source code files for the version of Camlp5 being used.  The
original Camlp5 files are 'lib/plexer.ml' and 'etc/pa_o.ml', and their adaptions
for HOL Zero are called 'plexer_hz.X.ml' and 'pa_o_hz.X.ml', where 'X' is "5" or
"6", for versions 5.x and 6.x of Camlp5 respectively.

    cp plexer_hz.X.ml plexer_hz.ml
    cp pa_o_hz.X.ml pa_o_hz.ml

In the second stage, we use 'ocamlc' in conjunction with 'camlp5r' to compile
the adapted lexer and syntax analyser into byte code files, called
'plexer_hz.cmo' and 'pa_o_hz.cmo' respectively.

    ocamlc -c
           -pp "camlp5r pa_lexer.cmo"
           -I +camlp5
           plexer_hz.ml

    ocamlc -c
           -pp "camlp5r pa_lexer.cmo pa_extend.cmo q_MLast.cmo"
           -I +camlp5
           pa_o_hz.ml

In the third stage, we use 'ocamlmktop' to incorporate these byte code files
into a new OCaml toplevel called 'hzocaml' (which gets put in the HOL Zero
executables directory later).  This new toplevel has the adjusted lexical
syntax, and is used as the basis for building HOL Zero.  Note that the command
for doing this in 'Makefile' also incorporates the 'nums' library for arbitrary
precision arithmetic, which is also necessary for building HOL Zero.

    ocamlmktop
          -o etc/hzocaml
          camlp5/camlp5o.cma etc/plexer_hz.cmo etc/pa_o_hz.cmo

Note that it is possible to incorporate the byte code files in a normal OCaml
toplevel session, using the '#load' directive.  However, OCaml does not support
'#load' for the Windows operating system, so to be consistent across operating
systems, we use the above approach of creating a separate 'hzocaml' toplevel.
