================================================================================
== CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION (HOL Zero User Manual)                             ==
==                                                                            ==
== by Mark Adams                                                              ==
== Copyright (c) Proof Technologies Ltd, 2011-2016                            ==
================================================================================


This is the HOL Zero User Manual, giving a complete description of how to use
the HOL Zero system.  Its intended readership is all users of the system, from
novices to expert implementors and proof auditors.  Refer to the documentation
directory README for related documents, including a tutorial for users new to
theorem proving in general, and a glossary for precise definitions of all
technical terminology used in this manual.

[Note that Tutorial is as yet unwritten!!!]

This chapter gives a brief overview of HOL Zero and the manual.


1.1 BASIC CONCEPTS

1.1.1 HOL ZERO

HOL Zero is a HOL theorem prover, i.e. a program supporting formal proof and
theory development in the HOL logic (see Section 1.1.2).  It is a relatively
simple theorem prover that concentrates on doing basic functionality well, and
improves on other HOL systems in areas such as architectural robustness,
concrete syntax design, complete and unambiguous pretty printing, and source
code readability.  These qualities boost its trustworthiness credentials, making
it suitable as a proof checker for proof auditing (see Section 1.1.3) of large
proofs created on other HOL systems.  The same qualities also make it suitable
as a pedagogical example for logicians, programmers and computer scientists
wishing to understand how theorem provers work.

To underline how seriously trustworthiness is taken in HOL Zero, there is a $100
bounty reward for anyone finding soundness-related flaws in the system.  See
'Bounty.txt' in the documentation directory for details.

User interaction with HOL Zero is done by submitting ASCII text command-line
instructions to a HOL Zero session.  These instructions are in fact expressions
in the ML programming language which get evaluated by an ML toplevel as they
are submitted.  However, the user does not need a deep understanding of ML in
order to use HOL Zero effectively.

Those who do have a deeper understanding of ML can extend the functionality of
HOL Zero.  HOL Zero is implemented in the OCaml dialect of ML, and extension is
done by submitting ML definitions to a HOL Zero session (which is simply an ML
session that has the HOL Zero source code incorporated).  Any such extensions
are safe in the sense that they cannot introduce logical unsoundness to the
system.  This safety is due to HOL Zero being implemented according to an "LCF-
style" architecture (see Section 4.1.3).  HOL Zero supports the Common HOL
standard (see Section 1.1.4), which eases the porting of proofs and ML source
code to and from other HOL systems.

It should be noted that, although suited to the checking of large proofs, an
unextended HOL Zero is not suited to the development of large proofs.  It only
supports a simple natural deduction style of proof, and lacks the advanced
interactive and automated facilities that other HOL systems have.

1.1.2 THE HOL LOGIC

The HOL logic is a typed, classical, higher-order predicate logic, i.e. a
logic with a type system, that supports reasoning over propositions and
predicates, with the Law of the Excluded Middle as a theorem of the logic, and
with the ability to quantify over functions and predicates.  It is based on
Church's typed lambda calculus, and has a relatively simple, polymorphic type
system that is not dependently-typed and does not support the quantification of
type variables.  Refer to the glossary for explanations of these concepts.

The HOL logic was first developed in the 1980s for a prototype system called
Cambridge HOL, and is now supported by the HOL family of theorem provers that
includes HOL4, ProofPower HOL, HOL Light and Isabelle/HOL.  These systems have
been used as crucial trusted tools on a variety of industrial projects,
including the verification of computer chip designs and safety-critical
software.  They have also been prominent in the formalisation of mathematics, in
particular in Tom Hales's groundbreaking Flyspeck project to formalise his proof
of the Kepler Conjecture.

1.1.3 PROOF AUDITING

Proof auditing is the human process of determining whether a proof script that
is claimed to prove a statement does indeed prove the statement.  This should be
performed for any important formal proof, because there are various potential
pitfalls when using theorem provers, any of which could quite conceivably render
the claimed formal proof completely invalid.  These range from basic mistakes
such as the proof script simply not successfully resulting in a formal proof, or
the proof script proving the wrong statement, to more subtle problems such as
the constants occurring in the proved statement having incorrect definitions,
the theorem prover's accumulated theory becoming inconsistent, or the theorem
prover itself having flaws in its design or implementation.

Proof auditing addresses these concerns by independently reviewing the proof
script.  This at least requires the original system used for executing the
script, so that it can be replayed through that system.  The auditor also needs
to carry out checks on the proved statement, the definitions used and the
consistency of the theory.  These checks would normally be done using the
original system, and the auditor would have to take into account known flaws in
this system and somehow make sure that at least these flaws were not being
exploited (intentionally or unintentionally) by the proof script.

HOL Zero offers a more effective solution than using the original system to
perform the checks, by acting as an independent proof checker to be used for
replaying the original formal proof on (via the export and import of proof
objects, for example see Common HOL below) and for performing the checks with.
This removes any concerns about soundness-related flaws in the original system
and the need to examine the proof script.  Because of its own trustworthiness
credentials, neither does the auditor need to be concerned about soundness-
related flaws in the proof checker.  Thus the process of proof auditing is
greatly simplified at the same time as significantly improving the assurance it
provides.

1.1.4 COMMON HOL

Common HOL is a standard for basic HOL system functionality, facilitating the
portability of source code and formal proofs between members of the HOL family.
It consists of the following components:

 - The specification of an API of basic HOL functionality, to enable
  straightforward porting of source code between compliant HOL systems;
 - The implementation of the API for various HOL systems;
 - The specification of a file format for proof object files, to enable porting
  of formal proofs between compliant HOL systems;
 - The implementation of proof object exporters and importers for various HOL
  systems.

All of these components except the proof exporters are freely available from the
Proof Technologies website.  The systems currently supported are HOL Zero, HOL
Light and hol90.  Proof exporting is available as a commercial service from
Proof Technologies, although various exported proof objects are freely available
on the website.  See the HOL Zero README file for website and contact details.


1.2 STARTING A SESSION

This section explains how to start up a HOL Zero session.  It is assumed that
the reader has access to a terminal window on a Unix-like operating system, and
that HOL Zero has already been installed (see the INSTALL file in the HOL Zero
home directory for instructions).

A HOL Zero session is started by running the 'holzero' executable, which is
created when HOL Zero is installed.  We give two alternatives for starting a
session from a Unix-like terminal window:

 1. The simplest way is to run HOL Zero in the terminal window itself (however,
   note that in-line editing facilities will be poor unless you have RLWrap
   installed - see INSTALL file).  To do this, directly execute the 'holzero'
   command from the terminal window:

      > holzero           (the ">" indicates the terminal window prompt)

 2. A better alternative for substantial interaction is to start an editor
   window that maintains separate subwindows for the user ML input script and
   the ML session feedback.  A good simple editor for this is Xpp (see INSTALL
   file), which is started by:

      > xpp -c holzero

   In Xpp, the upper window is for editing text and the lower window is for
   session feedback.  To enter text into the session, select the text and
   press Ctrl-Enter.  Text can also be entered line-by-line by pressing
   Ctrl-N at each line.

The first few seconds of starting HOL Zero involve building the system from
scratch.  A few hundred lines of output whizz past the screen, and then the HOL
Zero banner is printed, indicating a successful build.  HOL Zero is then ready
for commands to be entered by the user.  These commands are actually ML
expressions, but the novice user does not need to have a good knowledge of ML to
use HOL Zero.


1.3 OVERVIEW OF USAGE

This section gives a brief introduction to simple operation of HOL Zero,
including how to input HOL expressions and how to perform a simple proof.  For
more in-depth information, the reader should proceed to subsequent chapters of
this manual.

1.3.1 TERMS AND TYPES

Expressions in the HOL language are called "terms".  Terms are written using a
series of ASCII characters and enclosed by backquote characters ("`"), which is
called a "term quotation".  Entering a term quotation into the HOL Zero session
will result in the quotation being checked and printed back.

Term quotation syntax is simple but intuitive, and caters for various syntactic
mechanisms.  For example, the following term means "for all natural numbers x, y
and z, x is less than y and y is less than z implies that x is less than z":

    # `!x y z. x < y /\ y < z ==> x < z`;;  (the '#' indicates the OCaml prompt)
    - : term = `!x y z. x < y /\ y < z ==> x < z`

Entering an ill-formed term quotation results in an error message.

    # `x =`;;
    Exception:
    [HZ] SYNTAX ERROR: Unexpected end of quotation instead of RHS for infix
    "=".

Note that messages specifically reported by HOL Zero, rather than generally by
the ML toplevel, are prefixed with "[HZ]".  This is for all messages reported
by HOL Zero, including error messages, warnings and general user feedback.

HOL is a typed language, so that every term/subterm has a type, and terms must
be constructed so that they are type-correct.  This prevents the construction of
meaningless statements such as "3 equals true".

    # `3 = true`;;
    Exception:
    [HZ] TYPE ERROR: Function subterm domain type incompatible with argument
    subterm type.

Subterms in term quotations can be annotated to indicate their type, by
following the subterm with a colon (":") and then its type, all enclosed by
parentheses.  Type inference is used to automatically work out the types of any
unannotated subterms, with indeterminable types given numbered type variables.
By default, terms are printed back with just enough type annotation to avoid any
ambiguity about the types of any subterms.

    # `!(w:nat) (x:nat) y z. w = x /\ y = z`;;
    - : term = `!(w:nat) x (y:'1) z. w = x /\ y = z`

HOL types can be written outside the context of a term by using a type
quotation.  Like term quotations, type quotations are delimited by backquote
characters, but start with a colon.

    # `:nat#nat->bool`;;
    - : hol_type = `:nat#nat->bool`

1.3.2 THEOREMS, PROOF AND ASSERTION

HOL theorems consist of a set of boolean-valued assumption terms and a boolean-
valued conclusion term, and are reserved for statements that have been
established to hold (by proof or by assertion - see below).  The meaning of such
a statement is that the conclusion holds assuming that all the assumptions hold.
Theorems are displayed using a turnstile ("|-") to separate any assumptions from
the conclusion.  The HOL Zero base system comes with over 100 pre-proved
theorems, all of which have no assumptions.  These are listed in Appendix B2.

    # excluded_middle_thm;;
    - : thm = |- !p. p \/ ~ p

The inference rules of the HOL logic are the mechanisms for performing proof,
and are implemented as ML functions that take theorems and/or terms and return
theorems.  A proof step is performed simply by evaluating the application of
such a function.  Details about each inference rule are provided in Appendix A5.

    # assume_rule `x + y < 5`
    - : thm = x + y < 5 |- x + y < 5

    # spec_rule `a = 0` excluded_middle_thm;;
    - : thm = |- a = 0 \/ ~ (a = 0)

Proofs are simply compound ML expressions with inference rule applications at
each level.

    # deduct_antisym_rule
       (contr_rule `~ true` (assume_rule `false`))
       (eq_mp_rule (eqf_intro_rule (assume_rule `~ true`)) truth_thm);;
    - : thm = |- ~ true <=> false

The HOL Zero base system supports the following basic mathematical theories:
predicate logic, lambda calculus, ordered pairs and natural number arithmetic.
Details about each theory are provided in Appendix B1.

HOL Zero's theory can be extended using theory commands to declare new constants
and type constants and to make assertions about them.  For example, the constant
definition command introduces a new constant and returns a new theorem,
asserting its value to be equal to a given expression.  It takes an equality
term with the new constant as the LHS of the equality and the constant's value
as the RHS.  Details about each theory command are provided in Appendix A4.

    # new_const_definition `max_height = 7`;;
    - : thm = |- max_height = 7

1.3.3 HELP FACILITY

There is a help facility that can be used in a HOL Zero session to supply
details about a given HOL Zero command or theorem.

    # help "disch_rule";;
    ...

It can also be used to look up terminology from the glossary:

    # help "type operator";;
    ...

This help facility can also be used in the Unix terminal window, by calling the
'hzhelp' executable:

    > hzhelp disch_rule
    ...


1.4 SUBSEQUENT CHAPTERS

The subsequent chapters and appendices provide a complete description of HOL
Zero from a user's perspective.

Roughly speaking, users of the system divide into four kinds:

 - basic users, who perform simple proofs without the need to understand ML;
 - advanced users, who perform proof using ML programming;
 - auditors, who use HOL Zero for auditing proofs;
 - programmers, who extend the functionality of HOL Zero using ML programming.

This manual caters for all four kinds.  Even though HOL Zero is relatively
simple for a HOL theorem prover, it still has quite an extensive user interface.
However there are some aspects of the system that it is not necessary for basic
users and/or proof auditors to be familiar with in order to be effective.  We
explain here which parts of the manual are relevant for which users.

Readership Key:

  U1 - Basic users           *  - Highly relevant 
  U2 - Advanced users        +  - Background reading
  A  - Auditors
  P  - Programmers

The chapters break down as follows:

  Chapter  Readership   Description
           U1 U2 A  P

     2        *  +  *   HOL Zero's ML programming library.

     3     *  *  *  *   HOL Zero's variant of the HOL language and its language
                        utilities.  Essential reading for all, except sections
                        3.7 and 3.8, which can be skipped by basic users (U1).

     4     *  *  *  *   HOL Zero's variant of the HOL logic, its inference
                        rules, theory commands and theory.  Essential reading
                        for all.

The appendices provide detailed reference material.  The A-appendices provide
details about HOL Zero's ML interface, whereas the B-appendices provide
listings of its theory, and the C-appendix provides a HOL grammar.  This breaks
down as follows:

  Appendix Readership   Description
           U1 U2 A  P

    A1        *  +  *   ML programming library functions.

    A2     *  *  *  *   Input and display commands.

    A3     +  *  +  *   HOL language utilities.

    A4     *  *  *  *   HOL theory commands.

    A5     *  *     *   HOL inference rules.

    B1     *  *  *  *   HOL theory listing.

    B2     *  *     *   HOL theorems listing.

    C      *  *  *  *   HOL language formal grammar.
